DOCS-478 and DOCS-589: Refactor movement sensor and add new ADXL345 attributes (#1045)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/components/movement-sensor/_index.md

---
title: "Movement Sensor Component"
linkTitle: "Movement Sensor"
weight: 70
type: "docs"
description: "A sensor that measures location, kinematic data, or both."
tags: ["movement sensor", "gps", "imu", "sensor", "components"]
icon: "/components/img/components/imu.svg"
no_list: true
aliases:
    - /components/movement-sensor/
# SME: Rand
---

> A movement sensor component is a sensor that gives data on where a robot is and how fast it is moving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A movement sensor is a sensor that gives data on where a robot is and how fast it is moving.
```

Author: I included the word "component" to make it more clear that a "movement sensor" is a Viam concept, not a common term.

Examples of movement sensors include global positioning systems (GPS), inertial measurement units (IMUs), accelerometers and gyroscopes.

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

Viam also supports generic [sensors](/components/sensor/) and [encoders](/components/encoder/).

{{% /alert %}}

## Configuration

Viam supports several different models of GPS, IMU and accelerometer.
Click the model names below for configuration information:

> Model | Supported hardware <a name="model-table"></a>

Reviewer: this has turned into a mixture of description (for the rtk station) and supported hardware. Let's make that more consistent

Author: RTK station and camera mono do not represent hardware, but I like the "supported hardware" heading instead of "description" because people looking for supported hardware on the doc will see it. Do you think it should change to "Description"? Or should we add something like "Not hardware;" to the non-hardware models?

Reviewer: But not all of them describe hardware. If it says a model that derives from... I doesn't really fit?

Reviewer: Let's leave it for now and look at it when we make sure the components pages are consistent

Author: Yeah I totally see your point. Revisiting sounds good.

---------- | ------------------
[`gps-nmea`](./gps/gps-nmea/) | [NMEA-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NMEA_0183) GPS models
[`gps-rtk`](./gps/gps-rtk/) | [NTRIP-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Networked_Transport_of_RTCM_via_Internet_Protocol) [RTK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_kinematic_positioning) GPS models (**experimental**)
[`imu-wit`](./imu/imu-wit/) | IMUs manufactured by [WitMotion](https://witmotion-sensor.com/)
[`imu-vectornav`](./imu/imu-wit) | IMUs manufactured by [VectorNav](https://www.vectornav.com/products)

> [`accel-adxl345`](./adxl345) | The [Analog Devices ADXL345](https://www.analog.com/en/products/adxl345.html) digital accelerometer

Author: ```suggestion
[`accel-adxl345`](./adxl345) | The [Analog Devices ADXL345](https://www.analog.com/en/products/adxl345.html) digital accelerometer
[`camera_mono`](./cameramono/) | A model that derives movement data from a [camera](/components/camera/) stream (**experimental**).
```

[`mpu6050`](./mpu6050/) | A gyroscope/accelerometer manufactured by TDK InvenSense

> [`rtk-station`](./gps/rtk-station/) | An **experimental** model that allows you to configure your own correction source. Can be linked to an RTK-ready GPS module.

Reviewer: also experimental here should probably be at the end, like for gps-rtk

Author: ```suggestion
[`rtk-station`](./gps/rtk-station/) | A model that allows you to configure your own correction source. Can be linked to an RTK-ready GPS module (**experimental**).
```

```python
from viam.components.movement_sensor import MovementSensor

robot = await connect() # Refer to CODE SAMPLE tab code
my_imu = MovementSensor.from_robot(robot, "my-imu")

# Get the current linear acceleration
lin_accel = await my_imu.get_linear_acceleration()
print(f"my-imu linear acceleration in the x direction: {lin_accel.x}")
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

Place the example code in the `main()` function after `robot, err := client.New(...)`.

```go
import (
  "context"
  "time"

  "github.com/edaniels/golog"

  "go.viam.com/rdk/components/movementsensor"
)

robot, err := client.New() // Refer to CODE SAMPLE tab code
// Grab the movement sensor from the robot
myIMU, err := movementsensor.FromRobot(robot, "my-imu")
if err!=nil { 
  fmt.Println(err) 
}

// Get the current linear acceleration
linAccel, err := myIMU.LinearAcceleration(context.Background(), map[string]interface{}{})
if err!=nil { 
  fmt.Println(err) 
}
fmt.Println("my-imu LinearAcceleration in the x direction: ", linAccel.X)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## API

Different movement sensors provide different data, so be aware that not all of the methods below are supported by all movement sensors.

> You can run `GetProperties` on your sensor for a list of its supported methods.

Reviewer: I think that may be worth calling out more? Maybe? Up to you
```suggestion

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
You can run `GetProperties` on your sensor for a list of its supported methods.
{{< /alert >}}
```

Method Name | Description | Models That Support This Method
----------- | ----------- | -------------------------------

> [GetPosition](#getposition) | Gets the current latitude, longitude and altitude. | GPS models
> [GetLinearVelocity](#getlinearvelocity) | Gets the current linear velocity as a 3D vector. | GPS models
> [GetAngularVelocity](#getangularvelocity) | Gets the current angular velocity as a 3D vector. | IMU models and `gyro-mpu6050`
> [GetLinearAcceleration](#getlinearacceleration) | Gets the current linear acceleration as a 3D vector. | IMU models,  `accel-adxl345`, and `gyro-mpu6050`
> [GetCompassHeading](#getcompassheading) | Gets the current compass heading in degrees. | GPS models and `imu-vectornav`

Author: ```suggestion
[GetPosition](#getposition) | Get the current latitude, longitude and altitude. | GPS models
[GetLinearVelocity](#getlinearvelocity) | Get the current linear velocity as a 3D vector. | GPS models
[GetAngularVelocity](#getangularvelocity) | Get the current angular velocity as a 3D vector. | IMU models and `gyro-mpu6050`
[GetLinearAcceleration](#getlinearacceleration) | Get the current linear acceleration as a 3D vector. | IMU models,  `accel-adxl345`, and `gyro-mpu6050`
[GetCompassHeading](#getcompassheading) | Get the current compass heading in degrees. | GPS models and `imu-vectornav`
```

[GetOrientation](#getorientation) | Get the current orientation. | IMU models
[GetProperties](#getproperties) | Get the supported properties of this sensor. | all models
[GetAccuracy](#getaccuracy) | Get the accuracy of the various sensors. | GPS models
[GetReadings](#getreadings) | Obtain the measurements/data specific to this sensor. | all models

> [DoCommand](#docommand) | Sends or receives model-specific commands. | all models

Author: ```suggestion
[DoCommand](#docommand) | Send or receives model-specific commands. | all models
```

ang_vel = await my_sensor.get_angular_velocity()
# Get the y component of angular velocity
y_ang_vel = ang_vel.y
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `ctx` [(Context)](https://pkg.go.dev/context): A Context carries a deadline, a cancellation signal, and other values across API boundaries.
- `extra` [(map[string]interface{})](https://pkg.go.dev/google.golang.org/protobuf/types/known/structpb): Extra options to pass to the underlying RPC call.

**Returns:**

- [(r3.Vector)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/golang/geo/r3#Vector): A 3D vector containing three floats representing the angular velocity about the x, y and z axes in radians per second.
- [(error)](https://pkg.go.dev/builtin#error): An error, if one occurred.

For more information, see the [Go SDK docs](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/components/movementsensor#MovementSensor).

**Example usage:**

```go
mySensor, err := movementsensor.FromRobot(robot, "sensor1")

// Get the current angular velocity of the movement sensor.
angVel, _ := mySensor.AngularVelocity(context.TODO(), nil)
// Get the y component of angular velocity
yAngVel := angVel.Y
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### GetLinearAcceleration

> Report the current linear acceleration in the x, y and z directions (as a 3D vector) in millimeters per second per second.

Reviewer: is per second per second a useful way to say this? rather than per second squared or per second in each direction? If I even understand that correctly :)

Author: Yeah this is an accurate and meaningful way to say it. Per second squared is equivalent. Per second in each direction would be incorrect.

---
title: "Movement Sensor Component"
linkTitle: "Movement Sensor"
weight: 70
type: "docs"
description: "A sensor that measures location, kinematic data, or both."
tags: ["movement sensor", "gps", "imu", "sensor", "components"]
icon: "/components/img/components/imu.svg"
no_list: true
aliases:
    - /components/movement-sensor/
# SME: Rand
---

A movement sensor component is a sensor that gives data on where a robot is and how fast it is moving.
Examples of movement sensors include global positioning systems (GPS), inertial measurement units (IMUs), accelerometers and gyroscopes.

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

Viam also supports generic [sensors](/components/sensor/) and [encoders](/components/encoder/).

{{% /alert %}}

## Configuration

Viam supports several different models of GPS, IMU and accelerometer.
Click the model names below for configuration information:

Model | Supported hardware <a name="model-table"></a>
---------- | ------------------
[`gps-nmea`](./gps/gps-nmea/) | [NMEA-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NMEA_0183) GPS models

> [`gps-rtk`](./gps/gps-rtk/) | [NTRIP-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Networked_Transport_of_RTCM_via_Internet_Protocol) [RTK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_kinematic_positioning) GPS models

Reviewer 2: Experimental

> [`gps-rtk`](./gps/gps-rtk/) | [NTRIP-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Networked_Transport_of_RTCM_via_Internet_Protocol) [RTK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_kinematic_positioning) GPS models

Author: ```suggestion
[`gps-rtk`](./gps/gps-rtk/) | [NTRIP-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Networked_Transport_of_RTCM_via_Internet_Protocol) [RTK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-time_kinematic_positioning) GPS models (**experimental**)
```

[`imu-wit`](./imu/imu-wit/) | IMUs manufactured by [WitMotion](https://witmotion-sensor.com/)
[`imu-vectornav`](./imu/imu-wit) | IMUs manufactured by [VectorNav](https://www.vectornav.com/products)
[`accel-adxl345`](./adxl345) | The [Analog Devices ADXL345](https://www.analog.com/en/products/adxl345.html) digital accelerometer
[`mpu6050`](./mpu6050/) | A gyroscope/accelerometer manufactured by TDK InvenSense

> [`rtk-station`](./gps/rtk-station/) | An **experimental** model that allows you to configure your own correction source. Can be linked to an RTK-ready GPS module.

Reviewer: let's put all the ones that are experimental or MVP [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HM4vVoqOn6C_rpPEJOrnPpys4lB2CmZg90yFmgjnbXk/edit#gid=0) in draft mode

Method Name | Description | Models That Support This Method
----------- | ----------- | -------------------------------
[GetPosition](#getposition) | Gets the current latitude, longitude and altitude. | GPS models
[GetLinearVelocity](#getlinearvelocity) | Gets the current linear velocity as a 3D vector. | GPS models
[GetAngularVelocity](#getangularvelocity) | Gets the current angular velocity as a 3D vector. | IMU models and `gyro-mpu6050`
[GetLinearAcceleration](#getlinearacceleration) | Gets the current linear acceleration as a 3D vector. | IMU models,  `accel-adxl345`, and `gyro-mpu6050`
[GetCompassHeading](#getcompassheading) | Gets the current compass heading in degrees. | GPS models and `imu-vectornav`
[GetOrientation](#getorientation) | Get the current orientation. | IMU models
[GetProperties](#getproperties) | Get the supported properties of this sensor. | all models
[GetAccuracy](#getaccuracy) | Get the accuracy of the various sensors. | GPS models
[GetReadings](#getreadings) | Obtain the measurements/data specific to this sensor. | all models
[DoCommand](#docommand) | Sends or receives model-specific commands. | all models

> In addition to the information below, see the [Go SDK docs](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/components/movementsensor#MovementSensor)
> or [Python SDK docs](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/components/movement_sensor/index.html#).

Reviewer: I think we have enough links to these
```suggestion
```

### GetPosition

Report the current GeoPoint (latitude, longitude) and altitude (in millimeters).

> 

Reviewer: I think adding this info here as well would be helpful
```suggestion

Only supported by GPS models.

```

Author: Do you think it should be added to every method or just this one?

Reviewer: All the ones that aren't supported by all models

Author: done

---
title: "Movement Sensor Component"
linkTitle: "Movement Sensor"
weight: 70
type: "docs"
description: "A sensor that measures location, kinematic data, or both."
tags: ["movement sensor", "gps", "imu", "sensor", "components"]

> icon: "img/components/imu.png"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
icon: "/components/img/components/imu.svg"
```

no_list: true
aliases:
    - /components/movement-sensor/
# SME: Rand
---

> The movement sensor component is an abstraction of a sensor that gives data on where a robot is and how fast it is moving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The movement sensor component is a sensor that gives data on where a robot is and how fast it is moving.
```

^ I think saying it's an abstraction does not add anything without more context

> We have chosen to abstract these types of sensors into one common API.

Reviewer: This sounds a bit like we're narrating product choices in the docs - that's not adding anything useful
```suggestion
```

Author: True! I should've edited this section more, oops.

> There are many different types of sensors that can provide data for some or all of the following methods: `Position`, `Orientation`, `LinearVelocity`, `AngularVelocity`, `LinearAcceleration` and `CompassHeadings`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many different types of movement sensors that implement some or all of the following methods: `Position`, `Orientation`, `LinearVelocity`, `AngularVelocity`, `LinearAcceleration` and `CompassHeadings`.
```

If these are all the methods a matrix might be easy to create.

> A global positioning system (GPS) can provide position, linear velocity and compass headings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example, a global positioning system (GPS) can provide position, linear velocity and compass headings.
```

An inertial measurement unit (IMU) can provide angular velocity and orientation.

> We can further apply algorithms, such as a [Kalman filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalman_filter), to combine data from both a GPS and an IMU to output the full set of information of the movement sensor methods.

Reviewer: Avoid first person pronouns in the docs - focus on the user. Put the why first and then the how. (If you need to combine... )

[`accel-adxl345`](./adxl345) | The [Analog Devices ADXL345](https://www.analog.com/en/products/adxl345.html) digital accelerometer
[`mpu6050`](./mpu6050/) | A gyroscope/accelerometer manufactured by TDK InvenSense
[`rtk-station`](./gps/rtk-station/) | An **experimental** model that allows you to configure your own correction source. Can be linked to an RTK-ready GPS module.
[`fake`](./fake/) | Used to test code without hardware

## Control your movement sensor with Viam's client SDK libraries

The following example assumes you have a movement sensor called `my-imu` configured as a component of your robot.
If your movement sensor has a different name, change the `name` in the example.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

Place the example code after the `robot = await connect()` function in `main()`.

```python
from viam.components.movement_sensor import MovementSensor

robot = await connect() # Refer to CODE SAMPLE tab code
my_imu = MovementSensor.from_robot(robot, "my-imu")

# Get the current linear acceleration
lin_accel = await my_imu.get_linear_acceleration()
print(f"my-imu linear acceleration in the x direction: {lin_accel.x}")
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

> Example code should be placed after the `robot, err := client.New(...)` function in `main()`.

Reviewer: speak to the user

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
my_sensor = MovementSensor.from_robot(robot=robot, name='my_movement_sensor')

reset_dict = {
  "command": "reset",
  "example_param": 30
}
do_response = await my_sensor.do_command(reset_dict)
```

For more information, see the [Python SDK Docs](https://python.viam.dev/#the-do-method).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

**Parameters:**

- `ctx` ([`Context`](https://pkg.go.dev/context)): A Context carries a deadline, a cancellation signal, and other values across API boundaries.
- `cmd` (`cmd map[string]interface{}`): The command to execute.

**Returns:**

- `result` (`cmd map[string]interface{}`): Result of the executed command.
- `error` ([`error`](https://pkg.go.dev/builtin#error)): An error, if one occurred.

```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
mySensor, err := movementsensor.FromRobot(robot, "sensor1")

resp, err := mySensor.DoCommand(ctx, map[string]interface{}{"command": "reset", "example_param": 30})
```

For more information, see the [Go SDK Code](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/components/movementsensor/movementsensor.go#L212).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Next Steps

> Try adding a movement sensor to your [mobile robot](../base/) and writing some code with our [SDKs](../../program/sdk-as-client/) to implement closed-loop movement control for your robot!

Reviewer: Avoid exclamations in docs.
